by Alonzo Church, 1941

Introductory
============


What's Function
---------------

A function is a rule of correspondence by which when anything is given (as argument) another thing (the value of the function for that argument) may be obtained. That is, a function is an operation which may be applied on one thing (the argument) to yield another thing (the value of the function). It is not, however, required that the operation shall necessarily be applicable to everything whatsoever; but for each function there is a class, or range, of possible arguments -- the class of things to which the operation is significanly applicable -- and this we shall call the range of arguments, or range of the independent variable, for that function. The class of all values of the function, obtained by taking all possible arguments, will be called the range of values, or range of the dependent variable.

If f denotes a particular function, we shall use the notation (fa) for the value of the function f for the argument a. If a does not belong to the range of arguments of f, the notation (fa) shall be meaningless. (a means greek character alpha)

Calculus, in general, refers to any method or system of calculation guided by the symbolic manipulation of expressions. So there's differential calculus and integral calculus, both dealing with functions which are symbols. This the is difference between algebra and calculus, the former is dealing with numbers. Calculus is more abstract, because functions/symbols is more abstract than numbers.

It is not excluded that the range of arguments or range of values of a function should consist wholly or partly of functions. In particular it is not excluded that one of the elements of the range of arguments of a function f should be the function f itself. This possibility has frequently been denied, and indeed, if a function is defined as a correspondence between two previously given ranges, the reason for the denial is clear. Here, however, we regard the operation or rule of correspondence, which constitutes the function, as being first given, and the range of arguments then determined as consisting of the things to which the opeartion is applicable. This is a departure from the point of view usual in mathematics, but it is a departure which is natural in passing from consideration of functions in a special domain to the consideration of function in general, and it finds support in consistency theorems which will be proved in this paper.

The identity function I is defined by the rule that (Ix) is x, whatever x may be; then in particular (II) is I. Functions H is defined by (Hx) yields I, for any x.

Function Equality
-----------------

The most immediate and, from some points of view, the best way to settle this question is to specify that two functions f and q are the same if they have the same range of arguments and, for every element a that belongs to this range, (fa) is the same as (qa). When this is done we shall say that we are dealing with functions in extension.

It is possible, however, to allow two functions to be different on the ground that the rule of correspondence is different in meaning in the two cases although yielding the same result when applied to any particular argument. When this is done we shall say that we are dealing with functions in intension. The notion of difference in meaning between two rules of correspondence is a vague one, but, in terms of some system of notation, it can be made exact in various ways.


Functions of Serveral Variables
-------------------------------

It is desirable, however, for each positive integer n, to have the notion of a function of n variables. And in order to avoid the introduction of a separate primitive idea for each n, it is desirable to find a means of explaining functions of n variables as particular cases of functions of one variable. For our present purpose, the most convinient and natural method of doing this is to adopt an idea of Schonfinkel (which is known as currying by modern people). We use (fab) or ((fa)b) to denote a function which has two variables.

Another way to translate serveral variables function into one variable function is regarding serveral variables as a *union* (this word is selected by myself, not Church). So a function of two variables is regarded as a function (of one variable) whose arguments are ordered pairs, a function of three variables as a function whose arguments are ordered triads, and so on.

examples:

constancy function K is a function with two variable, that Kxy is x, for any x and y. So KII is I, KHI is H, and KI = H. application function 1 is a function whoise value for arguments f, x is (fx). It's a kind of identify function.


Abstraction
-----------

For our present purpose it is necessary to distinguish carefully between a symbol or expression which denotes a function and an expression which contains a variable and denotes ambiguously some value of the functions — a distinction which is more or less obscured in the usual language of mathematical function theory.

To take an example from the theory of functions of natural numbers, consider the expression (x^2+x)^2. If we say, “(x^2+x)^2 is greater than 1,000” we make a statement which depends on x and actually has no meaning unless x is determined as some particular natural number. On the other hand, if we say, “(x^2+x)^2 is a primitive recursive function,” we make a definitive statement whose meaning in no way depends on a determination of the variable x (so that in this case x plays the rôle of an apparent, or bound, variable). The difference between the two cases is that in the first case the expression (x^2+x)^2 serves as an ambiguous, or variable, denotation of a natural number, while in the second case it serves as the denotation of a particular function. We shall hereafter distinguish by using (x^2+x)^2 when we intend an ambiguous denotation of a natural number, but (λx(x^2+x)^2) as the denotation of the corresponding function — and likewise in other cases. 

(It is, of course, irrelevant here that the notation (x^2+x)^2 is commonly used also for a certain function of real numbers, a certain function of complex numbers, etc. In a logically exact notation the function, addition of natural numbers, addition of complex numbers, would be denoted by different symbols, say +n, +r, +c, and these three functions, square of a natural number, square of a real number, square of a complex number, would be similarly distinguished. The uncertainties as to the exact meaning of the notation (x^2+x)^2, and the consequent uncertainty as the the range of the arguments of the function (x^2+x)^2 would then disappear.)

In general if M is an expression containing a variable x (as a free variable, i.e. in such a way that the meaning of M depends on a determination of x), then (λxM) denotes a function whose value, for argument α is denoted by the result of substituting (a symbol denoting) α for x in M. The range of arguments of the function (λxM) consists of all objects α such the expression M has a meaning when (a symbol denoting) α is substituted for x.

If M does not contain the variable x (as a free variable), then (λxM) might be used to denote a function whose value is constant and equal to (the thing denoted by) M, and whose range of arguments consists of all things. This usage is contemplated below in connection with the calculi of λ-K-conversion, but is excluded from the calculi of λ-conversion and λ-δ-conversion — for technical reasons which will appear.

Notice that, although x occurs as a free variable in M, nevertheless, in the expression (λxM), x is a bound or apparent, variable. Example: the equation (x^2+x)^2 = (y2+y)2 expresses a relation between the natural numbers denoted by x and y and its truth depends on a determination of x and y (in fact, it is true if and only if x and y are determined as denoting the same natural number); but the equation (λx(x^2+x)^2) = (λy(y2+y)2) expresses a particular proposition — namely that (λx(x^2+x)^2) is the same function as (λy(y2+y)2) — and it is true (there is no question of a determination of x and y).

Notice that λ, or λx, is not the name of any function or other abstract object, but is an incomplete symbol — i.e. the symbol has no meaning alone, but appropriate formed expressions containing the symbol have meaning. We call the symbol λx an abstraction operator, and speak of the function which is denoted by (λxM) as obtained from the expression M by abstraction.

The expression (λx(λyM)), which we shall often abbreviate (λxy.M), denoted a function whose value, for an argument whose value is denoted by x, is denoted by (λyM) — thus a function whose values are functions, or a function of two variables. The expression (λy(λxM)), abbreviated as (λyx.M) denotes the converse function to that denoted by (λyx.M). Similarly (λx(λy(λzM))), abbreviated as (λxyz.M), denotes a function of three variables, and so on.

Functions introduced in previous sections as examples can now be expressed, if desired, by means of abstraction operators. For instance I is (λxx); J is (λfxyz.fx(fzy)); S is (λnfx.f(nfx)); H is (λxI), or (λx(λyy)) or (λxy.y); K is (λxy.x); 1 is (λfx.fx). 

(end of chapter I, where is later chapters?)
